Alex Pappademas, you’ve written a book.
Yeah, how about that?
It’s called “Keanu Reeves: Most Triumphant: The Movies and Meaning of an Irrepressible Icon.”
But I have a question for you.
Is it possible to even get near the bottom of Keanu Reeves?
I think he might be an unknowable icon. I sit before you as someone who’s thought about him for a whole year, and I don’t know if I know him any better than you do. But let’s find out.
Here we go.
I’m a culture writer at The New York Times, and this is “Still Processing.”
Today on the show, we’re going to talk about the one, the only, Keanu Reeves, and we’re going to try and figure out why we get so much out of a movie star who appears to give us so little. I think I have what is probably a pretty common Keanu Reeves experience, which is that I kind of took him for granted. He’s always been in my life, and I just never really felt like there was much to figure out. But who is this person, and what have I been misunderstanding if I’m thinking of him as an empty vessel?
Maybe he’s an empty vessel, and that’s a possibility that we have to entertain as part of it, I think. And I think part of your feeling that you can’t look right at him, and that he doesn’t — it’s almost like your interest glances off of him, I think it’s a valid Keanu experience.
And I think that a lot of that gets dramatized in the work.
He is always that guy who comes into the story and needs to be filled up.
And what’s the most obvious metaphorical version of that?
The Matrix is everywhere.
It is all around us. He has to get a plug put in the back of his head, and he gets filled up with kung fu just right in the back of the head.
I know kung fu.
Show me.
And I feel like that’s part of the thing that you are watching with Keanu, is somebody who comes into a story with nothing and has to get filled up with ideas. And I think what I’m chasing after in this book is those moments when the movie gets so thin that you can basically see right through it.
And you just see Keanu — and the movie is revealed as an artifice that Keanu is doing something real within it.
What is real?
How do you define real?
Well, I want to go back to 1991, which is about eight years before “The Matrix” comes out. It was the year of “Point Break,” the year of “My Own Private Idaho” — two very, very different movies that use him in not dissimilar ways, right?
Yeah, because there’s three movies in ‘91. It’s the best movie year an actor has ever had, because there’s also “Bill and Ted’s Bogus Journey.”
How’s it going, Bill and Ted?
We came to help you guys in your most unfortunate situation.
Yeah. Each of them — “Bogus Journey,” “Point Break,” “My Own Private Idaho,” each one like a platonic love story between two guys.
You still haven’t figured out what riding waves is all about, have you? It’s a state of mind. And for anybody who doesn’t know, “Point Break” is, of course, the “surfers rob a bank” movie starring Keanu Reeves as an F.B.I. agent.
Special Agent Utah, are you receiving my signal?
Zero distortion, sir.
And Patrick Swayze as the head of the bank robbing crew.
You want the ultimate, you got to be willing to pay the ultimate price. So what’s going on with Keanu in this movie as far as you can see? Because I have to tell you something, I still haven’t seen it.
For starters, “Point Break” is one of those movies where Keanu enters into a situation, and for the purposes of the plot, he has to be reprogrammed.
Yes.
And the programming is him learning how to be a cool guy in order to take down this gang of surfing bank robbers. And he is a blank slate who gets programmed for undercover purposes and then rejects the programming.
Bodhi, this is your wake-up call, man! I am an F.B.I. agent!
I know, man. Ain’t it wild?
But it’s about somebody with a conditional identity who realizes that he has no actual identity of his own.
Right, yes. And that is something that you discover through the Zen state of surfing, through the Zen state of skydiving, through the Zen state of bank robbery. But it’s a movie like “The Matrix” and like many other iconic Keanu Reeves movies.
The best ones, this is the throughline.
Yeah, it’s one of the throughlines, I think, for sure. That he’s got — that somebody needs to put information into his brain.
Right, yes. That’s what I love about the ‘91 movies, is that they do have this symmetry. He’s put in this same situation in both “Point Break” and “Private Idaho.” The world gets in the way of whatever love Keanu and his co-star have for one another.
Yes.
And in “My Own Private Idaho” there’s all of these situations. They’re in this Portland demimonde world of the hustlers, but it’s also a movie about Keanu deciding whether or not he’s going to love River Phoenix the way that River Phoenix thinks that he’s in love with Keanu.
What do I mean to you?
What do you mean to me?
Mike, you’re my best friend.
Well, I will say, this is my first true Keanu Reeves movie. So my first true Keanu Reeves experience was Keanu Reeves as an object, right?
I’m not going to say that Gus Van Sant intended for him to be objectified.
But I think as a young gay person in 1991 who was trying to figure out my own stuff, there’s something about River Phoenix’s evident longing for this other very beautiful person who is very receptive to the affection.
I can remember watching that film and just being like, I think I love Keanu Reeves too. I could love someone even if I wasn’t paid for it.
I love you, and you don’t pay me.
Mike.
I really want to kiss you, man.
All right come here, Mike.
Just sleep.
I mean, I am every person who has ever loved a probably straight guy, who is curious enough about the attention to reciprocate up to a point. It’s like a series of fantasies about Keanu Reeves that Keanu is participating in. He’s not sure how he feels about being looked at.
I only have sex with a guy for money.
Yeah, I know.
And two guys can’t love each other.
Yeah. And when Keanu pushes River Phoenix away, it just made me feel — two guys can love each other! Anyway, I just have a question for you, because we’re talking about Keanu in the 1990s. And he’s doing different things, and he becomes these different people to the extent that he can become a different person, right? These different environments for Keanu’s Keanu-ness to flourish is maybe the better way to put it.
So let's just go through the '90s movies. Let me get my little list here — Bram Stoker’s “Dracula.”
Bloody wolves chasing me through some blue inferno.
He’s Don John in “Much Ado About Nothing,” that Kenneth Branagh movie with Denzel and Emma Thompson.
If I had my mouth, I would bite.
I’m going to skip some of these. He plays Buddha. I must see the world, Yasodhara!
In 1994, his biggest hit up to that point: “Speed.”
50, stay above 50!
“Johnny Mnemonic,” “A Walk in the Clouds — ”
Can’t imagine how I want you. "Chain Reaction," "Feeling Minnesota," "Devil’s Advocate —"
This isn’t a popularity contest, it’s a murder trial.
And '99 comes “The Matrix.”
After this, there is no turning back.
So, he had one of the best ‘90s of anybody who was a movie star in the 1990s. Maybe Will Smith and Julia Roberts and Tom Cruise did better than he did. But what is the thing that’s happening to him during this period, and what is it that he’s doing for us during the ‘90s, if you can even square those two things?
I think it’s important that “My Own Private Idaho” comes out a week after “Nevermind” by Nirvana, a dark day for traditional masculinity because all of those things are about to become up for grabs thanks to ‘90s figures like Kurt Cobain and Keanu Reeves, who are going to show us a different way of being a man. Kurt was a different kind of rock star.
And Keanu is a different kind of rock star too.
And he has a lot of big hits.
He has “Speed,” which confirms him.
“Point Break” is like, oh, this guy could be an action star.
And then “Speed” comes out, and it’s like, oh, this guy is an action star.
And then he runs in the other direction.
It is a very Gen X thing to do when confronted with the opportunity to be super famous.
And he does Hamlet in Canada. And he’s clearly unsatisfied doing things like “Speed.”
As he’s doing “Speed,” he’s walking around on closed down freeway overpasses reciting all of the dialogue from Hamlet because he spent three years learning to do Hamlet.
So by the end of the decade, this movie comes along that squares the circle, which is “The Matrix,” a giant hit, but it also satisfies whatever that philosophical art film thing is within him, because he’s ultimately a bookish guy from Toronto. Right, Keanu is such an externally oriented person, where all the forces seem to be coming from outside the house, so to speak.
Who is it?
A lot of it means that he is, in some ways, an object for the camera.
It is the world that has been pulled over your eyes to blind you from the truth.
And depending on who he’s working with, he can sometimes seem stuck. You ever have that feeling where you’re not sure if you’re awake or still dreaming?
And he seems like a man without a style, so to speak.
Do you think you are the one?
Honestly, I don’t know.
I think Keanu is operating almost solely on the level of vibes. And I think that makes some people uncomfortable, because I often have felt this — I’m not the first person to say it, but Best Actor, Best Actress is often most acting.
Either you know that they are doing something physically difficult, or a transformation that’s like, oh my god, Glenn Close doesn’t look like Glenn Close at all in this. It’s amazing. Where did she go, whoever it is? Keanu does not give you, where did he go?
No, no, he’s always there. And he’s so present. And it’s so easy to take his presentness for granted and just assume that when he is being present in that way, that he’s not doing anything.
But he’s definitely doing something.
You’ve convinced me.
So we’re going to take a break, and when we come back, Keanu plays Keanu.
So Alex, we’re in the 2000s.
Who is Keanu Reeves at this point? So in 2014, Keanu appears in this movie, “John Wick,” where he’s a man who has lost his wife and has been given a puppy as her last gift to him.
John, I’m sorry I can’t be there for you, but you still need something, someone, to love.
And then he gets into a beef with some guys, and they do a terrible thing.
Oh, I love dogs. They murder his puppy.
And that’s when it turns out he is not a regular guy in any way. He is John Wick. He has killed more people than you or I have had fast food meals in our lives. And he proceeds to slay his way through, I think it’s the Russian mob underworld in this.
Yes.
He’s lost his wife and his puppy, and he’s going to beat up henchmen about it until he feels better. And of course, he’s not going to feel better, which is why there is “John Wick 2” and “John Wick Chapter 3.”
To me, it’s like when the dog dies, a part of John Wick is dead too.
And the part of him, the puppy that we associate — the cuddly internet creature that we associate Keanu Reeves with, if you’re so inclined to think of Keanu Reeves as a cute object — the thing that’s thrilling about John Wick is he is leaving the puppy.
Y’all killed him. He’s dead. And now I have to kill all you people for killing that part of me.
Yeah, I think that that’s why “John Wick” works, because there’s a sense of him, Keanu, as a tragic figure. But you know him as someone who has grown up without his father in the picture. He loses River Phoenix shortly after “Private Idaho,” dies of a drug overdose. He loses a child, and then the woman he was going to have the child with is killed in an accident.
Yes. And “John Wick” makes use of all these things that have been attached to his star text.
But it also makes him meme-able in some way too, right?
We just make these presumptions about who he is and how he’s feeling based on what little of him we see off-screen.
Yeah, the meme that really connects and turns him into this internet iconic figure is a picture of him sitting on a park bench looking sad. And they put him in all these situations, and it’s like, he’s sitting next to Kanye, or he’s sitting next to a dolphin, or whatever it is.
But everyone assumes that that’s a picture of him thinking about his whole entire life and thinking about every bad thing that’s ever happened to him. So what happens is that everyone falls back in love with him as someone who has been stoically enduring sadness and continues to be pure of heart, despite all of this evidence that the world is a bleak and terrible place.
I just feel like of all the movie stars we have had, he’s the only one I can think of who inspires this kind of wish fulfillment. He is not willing to put himself in the machine, and so as a result, in our own somewhat violently benign way, think that it’s our job to give him a star narrative.
And I wonder if it cost him something.
And to the degree that it did, I wonder what the cost is.
Yeah, but it’s interesting to think about it, if it’s cost him something. Because we create all these memes about him as a culture, and that allows him to live in the Twitter world, and in the Instagram world, and in those things without him having to do anything. It’s perfect.
Anything, yes, yes, yes.
He doesn’t have to do it.
He was always telling us he was not going to be the famous person that people wanted him to be.
When you bring up Kurt Cobain and Nirvana, this idea of selling out is a real thing, right? And there’s all these opportunities for him to give a piece of his soul to the fame industrial complex, but he’s not doing that. He basically said he was never going to do it essentially. The work is saying, I will not be doing this.
Yeah, because of his year of birth, he’s technically a Boomer, but he’s on the very far end of that.
Real Gen X vibes, baby.
Real Gen X vibes.
Real Gen X vibes. Oh, there he is.
But at this point, around the same time as he’s having this “John Wick” resurgence, he shows up in “Always Be My Maybe.”
It’s these two people.
Randall Park and Ali Wong are childhood friends who reunite later in life.
And then they meet again, and they try to navigate friendship turning into romance.
Yes.
They need an Asian-American love interest for Ali Wong, a rival for Randall Park. It is important to the filmmakers that that guy not be just some hot white guy, that it not be Chris Pine or whatever, but who is also Asian-American.
Keanu, part-Chinese, fits that bill, has never really been cast that way, but this is the first time.
And Ali Wong has talked about it, that she always just saw him that way.
That was the way in her family it was spoken about, that Keanu Reeves is this very successful Asian-American actor. And so he goes along with it, and he’s cast as Keanu Reeves.
Now I know what it feels like to be completely starstruck.
The only stars that matter are the ones you look at when you dream.
But he’s playing a version of Keanu Reeves that is maybe Keanu Reeves’s idea of what the egotistical actor version of Keanu Reeves would be like.
A pleasure to meet you, Marcus. Likewise, Keanu. I love your outfit.
Oh thanks, man. Tom Ford made a custom for me.
Wow.
I didn’t know you wore glasses.
I don’t, my eyes are perfect.
And there’s this amazing scene where he walks into the most pretentious restaurant on Earth and is absolutely in his element. They’re pointing at everybody. It’s like he comes here every night, and they just know, and they serve him all this like very bizarre nouvelle cuisine.
May I ask, do you have any dishes that play with time, the concept of time?
Ah, yes, we have a meat —
His entrance into that restaurant itself becomes a meme. So now the meme Keanu cycle is feeding on itself. It’s feeding into his movie roles, and he’s being cast in that way. And he’s game for it. He’s going along with it, but that version of himself does not, I don’t think, contain a grain of truth. It’s just an idea about Keanu.
This is an example of him receiving the projection though, right? He is performing the thing that he thinks he’s been avoiding all this time that we have been trying to put on him for two decades.
Yeah, he’ll be your mirror, right? If you’re like — it’s like, oh, you think of me as an Asian-American actor? OK, I’m an Asian-American actor then.
It’s never occurred to me before, but you’re right.
I’m honored to be here in that cast, in that group of people.
You think of me as the internet’s boyfriend?
Oh, I will do that thing for you.
I will be that.
He is always reflecting our own desires back to us.
It’s like there’s something about his unknowability that makes that relationship very personal, because we are seeing ourselves every time we look at him. Our fandom for Keanu is participatory in a way that loving, say, Brad Pitt, is not.
OK, I want to take you back to a “Matrix” moment.
Yeah.
Because I feel like many a Keanu movie has a Keanu metaphor in it. And the first thing you see in the first scene of Neo/Thomas Anderson in his life at all in that apartment is a computer screen. And it’s blinking, and the first word that you see is the word “searching” on a computer screen. And it just really struck me that we are looking for something in him.
I’ve been looking for you, Neo.
People in that movie in “The Matrix” are looking for him.
As you can see, we’ve had our eye on you for some time now, Mr. Anderson.
He is plucked from a kind of obscurity and made to believe that he is a messianic figure. What are you trying to tell me, that I can dodge bullets?
No, Neo, I’m trying to tell you that when you’re ready, you won’t have to.
And he resists it.
I’m not the one.
He doesn’t really believe this is true, but if you all want to believe it, OK, I’ll do it.
We’re going in. We’re taking Neo to see her. See who?
The Oracle.
And I can’t think of another person in any art form where so much of his value and his meaning comes down to us and our interpretation of it.
And I think it says a lot that in the fourth “Matrix,” basically, the moment comes when somebody shows up and is like, Neo, you’ve got to come with us.
We need you to go back into the Matrix and be Neo again.
He’s like, OK. He’s just like, OK, man. He’s literally like, OK.
I love that moment so much, because I think that the way that he is in that movie versus the way that he is in the first “Matrix” movie says something about how he’s evolved in the interim, because he’s made a peace with the idea of Keanu. And so when destiny calls, and they’re like, come back to the Matrix, we need you, he’s just right there. He goes along with it. What was your question?
There was no question. I just made a statement.
And in some ways, I’m just listening to you talk.
And I’m reminded of the thing that I think I have found appealing.
But if I were an actor, I think Keanu Reeves is how I would be caught acting.
I wouldn’t be comfortable with the camera stuff.
I wouldn’t be comfortable having to pretend to be a different person.
I’d go along with a lot of it, but I wouldn’t really enjoy it. And the real truth of his presence on-screen is such an indictment of watching, of looking at people perform anything.
It is getting at a fundamental awkwardness in the spectator-spectated relationship.
He’s looking at us as much as we’re looking at him, I think.
There’s a self-consciousness, but there is also an audience consciousness. He knows that we’re there, and he wonders if we’ve figured out that it’s just Keanu Reeves once again playing a character, that we have not forgotten that it’s him.
Is that good acting?
If nothing else, it is definitely, definitely great Keanu-ing.
There might be no other comparisons.
No, that’s it.
There’s only one Keanu.
One of one.
Alex Pappademas, I love you.
Thanks for coming on the show. I love you too, man, and any time you want to talk for 17 hours about Keanu, you know where to find me.
I do. I actually do.
That’s our show.
Keanu Reeves: Most Triumphant: The Movies and Meaning of an Irrepressible Icon is out.
Now run to the bookstore.
He’s also host of the excellent podcast, The Big Hit Show.
Still Processing is produced by Elyssa Dudley and Hans Buetow.
It’s edited by Sara Sarasohn and Sasha Weiss. The show is mixed by Marion Lozano and recorded by Maddy Masiello, digital production by Mahima Chablani and Des Ibekwe.
Our theme music is by Kindness.
It's called "World Restart" from the album, "Otherness."
And we will be back next week.
Thanks for listening.
